# Chips-n-Salsa - A Java library of customizable, hybridizable, iterative, parallel, stochastic, and self-adaptive local search algorithms

Copyright (C) 2002-2020 Vincent A. Cicirello.

https://www.cicirello.org/

Webpage: https://chips-n-salsa.cicirello.org/

## Overview

Chips-n-Salsa is a Java library of customizable, hybridizable, iterative, parallel, stochastic, and self-adaptive local search algorithms. The library includes implementations of several stochastic local search algorithms, including simulated annealing, hill climbers, as well as constructive search algorithms such as stochastic sampling. The library most extensively supports simulated annealing. It includes several classes for representing solutions to a variety of optimization problems. For example, the library includes a BitVector class that implements vectors of bits, as well as classes for representing solutions to problems where we are searching for an optimal vector of integers or reals. For each of the built-in representations, the library provides the most common mutation operators for generating random neighbors of candidate solutions. Additionally, the library provides extensive support for permutation optimization problems, including implementations of many different mutation operators for permutations, and utilizing the efficiently implemented Permutation class of the [JavaPermutationTools (JPT)](https://jpt.cicirello.org/) library.

Chips-n-Salsa is customizable, making extensive use of Java's generic types, enabling using the library to optimize other types of representations beyond what is provided in the library. It is hybridizable, providing support for integrating multiple forms of local search (e.g., using a hill climber on a solution generated by simulated annealing), creating hybrid mutation operators (e.g., local search using multiple mutation operators), as well as support for running more than one type of search for the same problem concurrently using multiple threads as a form of algorithm portfolio. Chips-n-Salsa is iterative, with support for multistart metaheuristics, including implementations of several restart schedules for varying the run lengths across the restarts. It also supports parallel execution of multiple instances of the same, or different, stochastic local search algorithms for an instance of a problem to accelerate the search process. The library supports self-adaptive search in a variety of ways, such as including implementations of adaptive annealing schedules for simulated annealing, such as the Modified Lam schedule, implementations of the simpler annealing schedules but which self-tune the initial temperature and other parameters, and restart schedules that adapt to run length.

## Repository Organization

The GitHub repository is organized as follows:
* The /build directory contains an ant build file, and other resources related to building the library.
* The /dist directory contains the compiled jar files of the library, one consisting of just the Chips-n-Salsa library, and a second jar file that contains Chips-n-Salsa as well as all dependencies.  The file name makes it clear which is which.
* The /docs directory contains the javadoc documentation in a sub-directory /docs/api. The /docs directory is also the location of the website for the project hosted via GitHub pages at https://chips-n-salsa.cicirello.org/.
* The /examples directory contains several example programs that use the library, and which demonstrate usage of various features.
* The /lib directory contains jar files of all dependencies.  At the present time, the only dependency is a library [JavaPermutationTools (JPT)](https://jpt.cicirello.org/) which is used for its representation of a Permutation, as well as for some of its random number generation capabilities.
* The /src directory contains all of the source code for Chips-n-Salsa.
* The /tests directory contains JUnit test cases for all functionality of the library.

## Building the Library (with ant)

The /build directory contains an ant build file.  The build file also executes the JUnit tests, and the build directory contains the relevant jar files for the JUnit libraries. If you prefer, you can replace these with the latest versions available from https://junit.org/junit4/ (just be sure to edit the property fields in the build.xml to point to the locations of the JUnit jar files).

To execute the build process do one of the following. If your working directory is the build directory, then simply execute `ant` from the command line. If your working directory is the parent of build, then execute: `ant -f build/build.xml`

The default of the provided ant build file, compiles all source files and all JUnit tests, executes all test cases, generates two jar files of the library (one that includes all dependencies, and one that does not), and compiles all example programs. The build process will terminate on any test case failures.  

The build generates the following directories: bin (for the compiled Java classes), testbin (for the compiled JUnit tests), and exbin (for the compiled example programs).

## Running the Example Programs

The examples directory contains example usage of several of the classes of the library. The examples directory contains a README file that provides more details on the examples. Each of the examples contains detailed comments within the source code explaining the example. Running the examples without reading the source comments is not advised.

Assuming the build was successful, the compiled example programs will be in the exbin directory.  If your working directory is the root of the repository, then you can run these programs from the command line with the following:

```
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.BitVectorExample
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.IntegerVectorExample
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.RootFindingExample
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.PermutationExample
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.ParallelPermutationExample
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.TimedParallelExample
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.CustomProblemExample
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.CustomIntegerCostProblemExample
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.PostHillclimbExample
java -cp "exbin;dist/chips-n-salsa-1.0-with-dependencies" org.cicirello.examples.chipsnsalsa.PreHillclimbExample
```

## License

The Chips-n-Salsa library is licensed under the [GNU General Public License 3.0](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html).

## Contribute

Report bugs, suggestions, feature requests, etc via the [issues tracker](https://github.com/cicirello/Chips-n-Salsa/issues). If you would like to directly contribute new code, you may also fork the repository, and create pull requests.  All code contributions must include JUnit tests, and all existing JUnit tests must pass for your code contribution to be accepted.  If your code contribution is a bug-fix, then you must include JUnit tests that recreate the bug prior to your fix, and which pass afterwards.
